“11.2 The Evolution of the Internet – Understanding Media and Culture.” Accessed October 20, 2022. [https://open.lib.umn.edu/mediaandculture/chapter/11-2-the-evolution-of-the-internet/](https://open.lib.umn.edu/mediaandculture/chapter/11-2-the-evolution-of-the-internet/).

Summary

- The near indestructibility of information on the Internet derives from a military principle used in secure voice transmission: decentralization. A web of data pathways would still be able to transmit secure voice "packets" even if a few of the nodes in the web were destroyed.
- Just as we use certain protocols when speaking over the phone, this decentralized network would only function through common communication protocols
- In 1973, the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency began researching protocols to allow computers to communicate over a distributed network. They used packet-switching technology to send small bundles of data instead of an unending stream of ones and zeros.
- Centralized versus distributed communication networks Computers do not necessarily have the logical linguistic capability to infer meaning from a constant stream of data, but packet-switching technology allows computers to make sure the packet has arrived uncorrupted.
- A host is a physical node that is directly connected to the Internet and "directs traffic" by routing packets of data to and from other computers connected to it. Each unique IP address refers to a single location on the global Internet.
- The early Internet was called ARPANET, and consisted of just four hosts. Now, there are over half a million hosts, and each of those hosts likely serves thousands of people.
- The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) gateway directs information to the correct location. It also checks for errors and ensures that data reaches its destination uncorrupted.
- E-mail has been around for quite a while. Ray Tomlinson invented the system using the @ symbol to denote the server (or host), and is credited with writing the first network e-mail using his program SNDMSG in 1971.
- Tim Berners-Lee created a new language called hypertext markup language (HTML) in 1989 to share documents and information throughout the local CERN network. Hypertext can include links to other documents, text-style formatting, images, and a wide variety of other components.
- Berners-Lee created a new language called HTML and a new communication protocol called HTTP. This allowed users to view other HTML documents and create their own.
- In 1991, the same year that Berners-Lee created his web browser, Q-Link was renamed America Online, and it allowed anyone with a telephone line to connect to the Internet. AOL's software allowed users to create communities based on just about any subject.
- The dot-com boom was a free for all of startup companies that used the Internet's ability for global, instantaneous communication to create a new type of business. However, the dot-com crash showed that investors did not necessarily know how to analyze these particular business plans.
- Social networking on the Internet had been going on since at least the invention of Usenet in 1979, but the recurring problem was profitability.
- The Internet has changed the way we connect with one another socially, by increasing the speed of information, the volume of information, and the "democratization" of publishing.
- A former DARPA scientist named Larry Roberts founded Telnet, the first commercial packet-switching company, and two years later the dial-up modem made it possible for anyone to access the Internet.
- Usenet was an electronic version of community bulletin boards founded in 1979 by two graduate students. Usenet was fundamentally and explicitly anarchic, and allowed users to collaborate in new ways. 
- David Bohnett founded GeoCities, a company that allowed users to create web pages in "communities" for free. The communities were centered on specific topics. GeoCities built its business on a freemium model, and Skype and Flickr. 
- GeoCities was so successful that Yahoo! bought it for $3.6 billion and closed it down in 2009 in every country except Japan.